Neuropsychology
===============

Neuropsychology studies the structure and function of the brain related to
specific psychological processes and behaviors. The term neuropsychology has
been applied to lesion studies in humans and animals. It has also been applied
to efforts to record electrical activity from individual cells (or groups of
cells) in higher primates (including some studies of human patients). It is
scientific in its approach and shares an information processing view of the
mind with cognitive psychology and cognitive science.

In practice neuropsychologists tend to work in clinical settings (involved in
assessing or treating patients with neuropsychological problems; see clinical
neuropsychology), forensic settings or industry (often as consultants where
neuropsychological knowledge is applied to product design or in the management
of pharmaceutical clinical-trials research for drugs that might have a
potential impact on CNS functioning).

Approaches
----------

Experimental neuropsychology is an approach which uses methods from
experimental psychology to uncover the relationship between the nervous system
and cognitive function. The majority of work involves studying healthy humans
in a laboratory setting, although a minority of researchers may conduct animal
experiments. Human work in this area often takes advantage of specific
features of our nervous system (for example that visual information presented
to a specific visual field is preferentially processed by the cortical
hemisphere on the opposite side) to make links between neuroanatomy and
psychological function.

Clinical neuropsychology is the application of neuropsychological knowledge to
the assessment (see neuropsychological test and neuropsychological
assessment), management, and rehabilitation of people who have suffered
illness or injury (particularly to the brain) which has caused neurocognitive
problems. In particular they bring a psychological viewpoint to treatment, to
understand how such illness and injury may affect and be affected by
psychological factors. They also can offer an opinion as to whether a person
is demonstrating difficulties due to brain pathology or as a consequence of an
emotional or another (potentially) reversible cause or both. For example, a
test might show that both patients X and Y are unable to name items that they
have been previously exposed to within the past 20 minutes (indicating
possible dementia). If patient Y can name some of them with further prompting
(e.g. given a categorical clue such as being told that the item they could not
name is a fruit), this allows a more specific diagnosis than simply dementia
(Y appears to have the vascular type which is due to brain pathology but is
usually at least somewhat reversible). Clinical neuropsychologists often work
in hospital settings in an interdisciplinary medical team; others work in
private practice and may provide expert input into medico-legal proceedings.

Cognitive neuropsychology is a relatively new development and has emerged as a
distillation of the complementary approaches of both experimental and clinical
neuropsychology. It seeks to understand the mind and brain by studying people
who have suffered brain injury or neurological illness. One model of
neuropsychological functioning is known as functional localization. This is
based on the principle that if a specific cognitive problem can be found after
an injury to a specific area of the brain, it is possible that this part of
the brain is in some way involved. However, there may be reason to believe
that the link between mental functions and neural regions is not so simple. An
alternative model of the link between mind and brain, such as parallel
processing, may have more explanatory power for the workings and dysfunction
of the human brain. Yet another approach investigates how the pattern of
errors produced by brain-damaged individuals can constrain our understanding
of mental representations and processes without reference to the underlying
neural structure. A more recent but related approach is cognitive
neuropsychiatry which seeks to understand the normal function of mind and
brain by studying psychiatric or mental illness.

Connectionism is the use of artificial neural networks to model specific
cognitive processes using what are considered to be simplified but plausible
models of how neurons operate. Once trained to perform a specific cognitive
task these networks are often damaged or 'lesioned' to simulate brain injury
or impairment in an attempt to understand and compare the results to the
effects of brain injury in humans.

Functional neuroimaging uses specific neuroimaging technologies to take
readings from the brain, usually when a person is doing a particular task, in
an attempt to understand how the activation of particular brain areas is
related to the task. In particular, the growth of methodologies to employ
cognitive testing within established functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) techniques to study brain-behavior relations is having a notable
influence on neuropsychological research.

In practice these approaches are not mutually exclusive and most
neuropsychologists select the best approach or approaches for the task to be
completed.

Methods and tools
-----------------

* The use of standardized neuropsychological tests. These tasks have been
  designed so the performance on the task can be linked to specific
  neurocognitive processes. These tests are typically standardized, meaning
  that they have been administered to a specific group (or groups) of
  individuals before being used in individual clinical cases. The data
  resulting from standardization are known as normative data. After these data
  have been collected and analyzed, they are used as the comparative standard
  against which individual performances can be compared. Examples of
  neuropsychological tests include: the Wechsler Adult Memory Scale (WMS), the
  Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), and the Wechsler Intelligence
  Scale for Children (WISC). Other tests include the Halstead-Reitan
  Neuropsychological Battery, the Boston Naming Test, the Wisconsin Card
  Sorting Test, the Benton Visual Retention Test, and the Controlled Oral Word
  Association. (The Woodcock Johnson and the Nelson-Denny are not
  neuropsychological tests per se. They are psycho-educational batteries of
  tests used to measure an individual's intra-disciplinary strengths and
  weakness in specific academic areas (writing, reading and arithmetic)).
* The use of brain scans to investigate the structure or function of the brain
  is common, either as simply a way of better assessing brain injury with high
  resolution pictures, or by examining the relative activations of different
  brain areas. Such technologies may include fMRI (functional magnetic
  resonance imaging) and positron emission tomography (PET), which yields data
  related to functioning, as well as MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) and
  computed axial tomography (CAT or CT), which yields structural data...
* The use of electrophysiological measures designed to measure the activation
  of the brain by measuring the electrical or magnetic field produced by the
  nervous system. This may include electroencephalography (EEG) or
  magneto-encephalography (MEG).
* The use of designed experimental tasks, often controlled by computer and
  typically measuring reaction time and accuracy on a particular tasks thought
  to be related to a specific neurocognitive process. An example of this is
  the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB).
